279. User creation added to database creation code (#280)
open-afc-project/openafc: helm/README.md

|grafana-admin-password|grafana|Grafana admin user password|

> ### Postgres databases and their provisioning <a name="postgres_dsatabases">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Postgres databases and their provisioning <a name="postgres_databases">
```

#### Databases <a name="databases">

> OpenAFC usesvarious `PostgreSQL` databases. Databases passed to containers in pairs of environment variables: one for DSN (without password or with some default password), another with name of file containing password (this file is a mapping of secret from the secret store). Former have default values or parts thereof.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenAFC uses various `PostgreSQL` databases. Databases passed to containers in pairs of environment variables: one for DSN (without password or with some default password), another with name of file containing password (this file is a mapping of secret from the secret store). Former have default values or parts thereof.
```

Typically DSN's user 'own' database (may do read/write/management), but, say, Grafana datasources uses DSNs that can be made read-only.

> Deveelopment environment (e.g. `k3d`) stores all databases in two containers: `ratdb` - that contains `fbrat` database and `bulk-postgres` that contains all other databases. In production environment all `PostgreSQL` databases expected to be on infrastructure-provided server(s) (most likely - single, but multiple servers may be used as well).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Development environment (e.g. `k3d`) stores all databases in two containers: `ratdb` - that contains `fbrat` database and `bulk-postgres` that contains all other databases. In production environment all `PostgreSQL` databases expected to be on infrastructure-provided (managed) server(s) (most likely - single, but multiple servers may be used as well).
```

Here is a list of databases and their DSN environment variables of their 'owners':

|Database|DSN environment variable|Password file environment variable|Password external secret|`k3d` server|Pods|
|--------|------------------------|----------------------------------|------------------------|------------|----|
|fbrat|FLASK_SQLALCHEMY_DATABASE_URI|FLASKFILE_SQLALCHEMY_DATABASE_PASSWORD|ratdb-password|ratdb|rat-server, msghnd (deprecated), afcserver, objst, cert-db|
|ALS|POSTGRES_ALS_CONN_STR|POSTGRES_ALS_PASSWORD_FILE|als-db-password|bulk-postgres|als-siphon|
|AFC_LOGS|POSTGRES_LOG_CONN_STR|POSTGRES_LOG_PASSWORD_FILE|als-json-log-db-password|bulk-postgres|als-siphon|
|fs_state|ULS_SERVICE_STATE_DB_DSN|ULS_SERVICE_STATE_DB_PASSWORD_FILE|uls-state-db-password|bulk-postgres|uls-downloader|
|rcache|RCACHE_POSTGRES_DSN|RCACHE_POSTGRES_PASSWORD_FILE|ratdb-password|bulk-postgres|rcache, msghnd (deprecated), afcserver|
|grafana|GRAFANA_DATABASE_URL|GRAFANA_DATABASE_PASSWORD_FILE|grafana-db-password|bulk-postgres|grafana|

> Here is a list of nonowner (read-only) DSNs:

Reviewer: nonowner 
```suggestion
Here is a list of non-owner (read-only) DSNs:
```

|Database|DSN environment variable|Password file environment variable|Password external secret|Pods|
|--------|------------------------|----------------------------------|------------------------|----|
|ALS|GRAFANA_DS_ALS_RO_DSN|GRAFANA_DS_ALS_RO_PASSWORD_FILE|als-ro-db-password|grafana|
|AFC_LOGS|GRAFANA_DS_JSON_LOG_RO_DSN|GRAFANA_DS_JSON_LOG_RO_PASSWORD_FILE|als-json-log-ro-db-password|grafana|
|fs_state|GRAFANA_DS_FS_STATE_RO_DSN|GRAFANA_DS_FS_STATE_RO_PASSWORD_FILE|uls-state-ro-db-password|grafana|

#### Provisioning <a name="provisioning">

> Here are variosu approaches ti create these databases and their users (if different from default `postgres` user).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are various approaches to create these databases and their users (if different from default `postgres` user).
```

##### Explicit provisioning <a name="explicit_provisioning">

This is the most secure way to create databases and users. It is also the most laborious way. OpenAFC administrator manually creates datbases, users, grants permissions, etc. This is how things should be done on production environnemt - and this is outside of the scope of this document.

##### Self-provisioning <a name="self_provisioning">

Pods request REST API on *rat-server* to create databases and users (if different from `postgres`). To fulfill this role *rat-server* is endowed with pairs of environment variables (`AFC_DB_CREATOR_DSN_<SERVER>`/`AFC_DB_CREATOR_PASSWORD_FILE_<SERVER>`) with credentials of 'postgres' user - one pair per database server

E.g. on `k3d` environment variables are:

- `AFC_DB_CREATOR_DSN_RATDB`, `AFC_DB_CREATOR_PASSWORD_FILE_RATDB`
- `AFC_DB_CREATOR_DSN_BULK_POSTGRES`, `AFC_DB_CREATOR_PASSWORD_FILE_POSTGRES`

> On `GCP` with one database server singla pair would suffuce, e.g.: `AFC_DB_CREATOR_DSN_POSTGRES`, `AFC_DB_CREATOR_PASSWORD_FILE_POSTGRES`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On `GCP` with one database server single pair would suffice, e.g.: `AFC_DB_CREATOR_DSN_POSTGRES`, `AFC_DB_CREATOR_PASSWORD_FILE_POSTGRES`.
```

> This method does not create read-only DSNs (because automated creation of read-only users in `PostgreSQL` is too finicky), so the have to be the same as 'owning' DSNs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This method does not create read-only DSNs (because automated creation of read-only users in `PostgreSQL` is too finicky), so they have to be the same as 'owning' DSNs.
```

This method has advantage of working automagically but it has it security flaws:

  - Credentials of `postgres` user are given to pod
  - Password is passed through the REST API in plain text (not happened if database and user already exist - e.g provisioned explicitly)
  - Read-only DSNs have to use the same credentials as read/write DSNs

Here are various applications of this method to different environments:

- `k3d` - by default all databases have 'postgres' password for `postgres` users, all DSNs use this `postgres` user. Nothing neds to be done, it works out of the box.

- `GCP` - simplified approach (described in examples below). All DSNs use `postgres' user. Password for this user stored in external secret (e.g. named 'postgres-password`), then all password secrets are mapped to this external secret. This creates some modicum of security.

> - `GCP` - more secure approach. Each 'owning' DSN has its own user and password. Passwords stored in respective external secrets. Still, one pod has `postgres` credentials, 'read-only' DSNs are in fact read-write. If better then this is needed - explicit porvisioning should be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `GCP` - more secure approach. Each 'owning' DSN has its own user and password. Passwords stored in respective external secrets. Still, one pod has `postgres` credentials, 'read-only' DSNs are in fact read-write. If better then this is needed - explicit provisioning should be used.
```
